---
title: One Marvelous Scene - On Your Left
description: We're finally in the Endgame! Let's celebrate by looking back at the opening to The Winter Soldier, and what it can show us about the MCU as a whole!
date: "2019-04-26T14:36:20.121Z"
---

By the time I have this posted, I'll likely be hours away from seeing Avengers: Endgame on a lovely Friday afternoon, which will possibly be turned bittersweet and exhausting by the events of the film. For now, all I can do is speculate whilst avoiding various social medias like the plague so as not to be spoiled, and think back on everything that has led to this achievement in cinema. The Marvel Cinematic Universe has put in eleven long years of hard work in film-making to give us 22 films ranging from "Pretty Good" to "Holy Crap That Was Amazing I Can't Believe I Just Saw That", and over that span, along with giving us amazing action and comedy, has also presented many thought-provoking, dramatic, and downright emotional moments that have resonated with millions.

It's scenes of this nature that drove [Nando, who v's Movies](https://twitter.com/NandovMovies), to put together a content creation initiative called One Marvelous Scene, in which he and several other video essayists chose one scene in the MCU to review, examine, and explain its impact on themselves, others, the film and the MCU as a whole. If you haven't already, I'll provide a link to the playlist at the end of this piece so you can hear people way better at this than me give this treatment to a variety of other scenes across this astonishing series of films. As for me, I've tried and failed a few times to prove I had charisma with a microphone, so for now, I am content to give my take in the written word... or, rather, the typed word.

At least, I thought I was. Truth be told, the paragraphs above this one are all _several_ hours older than everything onward. Hopefully this statement won't age well but if you're seeing this article around the time I'm actually posting it, you're also seeing that the design of this blog is... lacking. Between that and some of the language here, it's probably very clear I'm not at all accustomed to putting myself and my opinions out into the ether. Symptomatic of that, the original version of this piece was an attempt to use the ending of Iron Man to talk about the very human element to the characters of the MCU, which I consider its greatest strength. It was only after trying to make it work for several hours that I realized I was using the wrong scene to get that point across, trying to utilize an iconic scene for bonus points where it didn't fit my actual feelings on the matter. We're now a shower, a snack and a clean slate later, time I used to consider what scene _does_ get it across the best. So now, after all this nervous preamble, let's talk about the opening to Captain America: The Winter Soldier.

---

The second title outing of the Star-Spangled Man with a Plan, and the first of the MCU to be directed by Joe and Anthony Russo, the film was saddled with a very difficult task: we put Steve Rogers on ice so he could be here for Avengers, what do you do with him now? Much of Joss Whedon's usage of Cap in Avengers was focused on the idea that he was the man out of time, used as the butt of jokes for him not understanding what people are talking about, but also being the kind of old-fashioned military man needed to pull together and galvanize the very big personalities at play with the titular team. Right down to being put in a more colorful and vibrant version of his costume from First Avenger, his involvement hinged greatly on him being a grand war hero from the 40's. So when the dust settles, and you have to show him adjusting, where do you even start?

Seeing his morning workout, doing Several Super-Soldier Serum-Supplemented Sircuits[sic] around the Reflecting Pool, is a pretty good guess.

For starters, I need to give Anthony Mackie some much-deserved props; not even a minute in, and he proves his merit to the cast. Somehow even before they stop to have their first actual conversation you can feel the camaraderie just in his reactions each time Cap passes him. And given Steve's playful asking if Sam "needs a medic" when they finally stop running makes it very clear it was 100% intentional, and that Captain America is not above messing with fellow military.

Which leads into the meat and potatoes of the scene. Their banter is a lot of fun, and warms us quickly to Sam knowing he's going to become a major fixture in the film, but the tissue that lets him connect with Steve, stops him from just running off and them never meeting again, is relating to him with shared experience in the military. Even something as simple as the feeling of a real bed after months overseas in a rickety cot at best, and "using rocks for pillows like a caveman" at worst; what matters is that rather than immediately jumping into how weird this new time period is, Sam first takes the time to relate to him as a military man, where it's implied most people get hung up in reverence of the legend of Cap, or his more recent exploits in New York. This change is clearly refreshing to Steve, who then willingly opens up about the changes from his old life... in sorts.

I say "in sorts" because looking back on this scene, it's interesting how he chooses to point out some very superficial changes over his 70-year ice nap. I mean, he's right, no polio _is_ good, it's just not something I feel I'd draw specific attention to when asked that question. Granted, I can't claim in the same position I'd be able to pinpoint the more fundamental changes in a quick, friendly conversation, but it's interesting with how quick-witted and engaged he is in the rest of this conversation, he seems to meander when asked this question he's surely been asked a lot in the 2 years since the Battle of New York. And now watching this more closely, and noting the mildly confused expression on Sam's face, I'm beginning to think it was entirely intentional when you realize this is a big part of Steve's arc carrying through Age of Ultron and beyond: the idea of whether he can actually accept his new life in the modern day.

Though this idea is put on hold for the sequence aboard the Lumerian Star, it's shortly thereafter discussed in detail when talking with Nick Fury about Project Insight, with Peggy Carter about how much the world has changed in the intervening years, and yes, taking up Sam on his offer to meet him at the V.A. where Steve outright admits he doesn't know what would make him happy outside of working with SHIELD. As far as the context of this movie goes, it plays more into his ideals, and how the things he fought for back in the 40s seem to be considered outdated by the entity he now works with. That ideal does him credit when it's revealed HYDRA is involved, but even before that his hold to his ideals is admirable, and a big reason we root for him. But just as much as it plays into why we like him, it also plays into his biggest flaw: as Ultron would later go on to point out, Cap seems to only "pretend [he] can live without a war." He believed he died in one of history's greatest conflicts, only to wake up 70 years later to then fight against an army of aliens with other enhanced people like himself, and now, in the relative downtime working the day-to-day with SHIELD, he feels like there's not much purpose for him anymore. He eventually comes to terms with this flaw by the end of Age of Ultron, stating that while he may have wanted stability 70 years ago, somebody else may have emerged from the ice.

But bringing it back around to the topic at hand, and why I chose this particular scene to discuss all this, all of that manages to come through in Chris Evans' performance, even before those other moments and conversations take place. In the stilted way he talks about what he missed, compared to how present he was talking about his and Sam's experience fighting for their country, displays subtextually what will define his character over the following films, and does so by pairing him off with a character and an actor with whom he can have that chemistry and believably discuss it in a way that still keeps the audience interested.

This, I feel, is the biggest contributor to the MCU's longevity. It knows action will get butts in seats, but if it wants to maintain that audience, the characters need to be engaging, and to that end, it uses strong casting, strong writing, and the ability to develop these arcs across several movies to show the very human element to these heroes. It gives them conflicts beyond just fighting a supervillain that we can sympathize with, and through this, we identify with and emotionally attach to the characters for years in a way almost unheard of in film, certainly in comic book movies, before Iron Man kicked off the MCU. The fact that so many of us are so concerned about who will make it out of Endgame (Still haven't seen it, please don't spoil just yet) is a testament to the quality that's been put into these past 11 years and 22 films. Where the MCU goes from here is a nebulous mystery, but I have faith that we're in for even more quality filmmaking with even more amazing characters.

---

If you'd like to hear thoughts on some of the other amazing moments across the franchise, [here](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLd7v7nQLQGwKQxfPtUPz6i1h3-JVxBx0D) is the playlist for One Marvelous Scene on YouTube. A boatload of credit to Nando v Movies for putting this all together, it's an extremely clever way to help galvanize the people of the internet to give their thoughts on the MCU short of asking everyone to start cranking out reviews of every movie. And for those reading at home, please send me your thoughts over on Twitter (link below). As I already said, I am very new to this, and any feedback that can be provided would be immensely helpful. For now, though, my afternoon showing is fast approaching. I'll see you all after the Endgame.
